docs: documentation for 08-wasm (#4203)
cosmos/ibc-go: docs/docs/03-light-clients/04-wasm/02-concepts.md

---
title: Concepts
sidebar_label: Concepts
sidebar_position: 2
slug: /ibc/light-clients/wasm/concepts
---

# Concepts

Learn about the differences between a proxy light client and a Wasm light client. {synopsis}

## Proxy light client

> The `08-wasm` module is not a regular light client in the same sense as, for example, the 07-tendermint light client. `08-wasm` is instead a *proxy* light client module, and this means that the module acts a proxy to the actual implementations of light clients. The module will interface with the actual light clients uploaded as Wasm byte code and will delegate all operations to them (i.e. `08-wasm` just passes through the requests to the Wasm light clients). Still, the `08-wasm` module implements all the required interfaces necessary to integrate with core IBC, so that 02-client can call into it as it would for any other light client module. These interfaces are `ClientState`, `ConsensusState` and `ClientMessage`, and we will describe them in the context of `08-wasm` in the following sections. For more information about this set of interfaces, please read section [Overview of the light client module developer guide](../01-developer-guide/01-overview.md#overview).

Reviewer: nit, not super opinionated tho

```suggestion
The `08-wasm` module is not a regular light client in the same sense as, for example, the 07-tendermint light client. `08-wasm` is instead a *proxy* light client module, and this means that the module acts a proxy to the actual implementations of light clients. The module will act as a wrapper for the actual light clients uploaded as Wasm byte code and will delegate all operations to them (i.e. `08-wasm` just passes through the requests to the Wasm light clients). Still, the `08-wasm` module implements all the required interfaces necessary to integrate with core IBC, so that 02-client can call into it as it would for any other light client module. These interfaces are `ClientState`, `ConsensusState` and `ClientMessage`, and we will describe them in the context of `08-wasm` in the following sections. For more information about this set of interfaces, please read section [Overview of the light client module developer guide](../01-developer-guide/01-overview.md#overview).
```

### `ClientState`

> The `08-wasm`'s `ClientState` data structure maintains three fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `08-wasm`'s `ClientState` data structure contains three fields:
```

> - `Data` contains the bytes of the Protobuf-encoded client state of the underlying light client implemented as a Wasm contract. For example, if the light client Wasm contract implements the Tendermint light client algorithm, then `Data` will contain the bytes for a [Tendermint client state](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/v7.2.0/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/tendermint.pb.go#L36-L66).

Reviewer 2: do we want to use the `Tendermint` implementation as an example? Maybe we could use something like the grandpa contract as an example since ideally people just use the existing go Tendermint implementation.

Mainly just worried about pushing people towards a situation where we have a go tendermint client on one side and then a wasm tendermint client on the other which would cause problems.

Author: >Mainly just worried about pushing people towards a situation where we have a go tendermint client on one side and then a wasm tendermint client on the other which would cause problems.

At the moment this would not be possible, since ibc-go will not support Tendermint Wasm clients when we release this, but I agree that better to use a different example. I will change it.

- `CodeHash` is the sha256 hash of the Wasm contract's byte code. This hash is used as an identifier to call the right contract.
- `LatestHeight` is the latest height of the counterparty state machine (i.e. the height of the blockchain), whose consensus state the light client tracks.

```go
type ClientState struct {
  // bytes encoding the client state of the underlying 
  // light client implemented as a Wasm contract
  Data         []byte
  // sha256 hash of Wasm contract byte code
  CodeHash     []byte
  // latest height of the counterparty ledger
  LatestHeight types.Height
}
```

See section [`ClientState` of the light client module developer guide](../01-developer-guide/01-overview.md#clientstate) for more information about the `ClientState` interface.

### `ConsensusState`

The `08-wasm`'s `ConsensusState` data structure maintains one field:

> - `Data` contains the bytes of the Protobuf-encoded consensus state of the underlying light client implemented as a Wasm contract. For example, if the light client Wasm contract implements the Tendermint light client algorithm, then `Data` will contain the bytes for a [Tendermint consensus state](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/v7.2.0/modules/light-clients/07-tendermint/tendermint.pb.go#L101-L109).

Reviewer 2: if we do change from using tendermint as an example, this would need to be updated too.

```go
type ClientMessage struct {
  // bytes encoding the header(s) or misbehaviour for the underlying light client
  // implemented as a Wasm contract.
  Data []byte
}
```

See section [`ClientMessage` of the light client module developer guide](../01-developer-guide/01-overview.md#clientmessage) for more information about the `ClientMessage` interface.

## Wasm light client

The actual light client can be implemented in any language that compiles to Wasm and implements the interfaces of a [CosmWasm](https://docs.cosmwasm.com/docs/) contract. Even though in theory other languages could be used, in practice (at least for the time being) the most suitable language to use would be Rust, since there is already good support for it for developing CosmWasm smart contracts.

> At the moment of writing there are two contracts available: one for [Tendermint](https://github.com/ComposableFi/centauri/tree/master/light-clients/ics07-tendermint-cw) and one [Grandpa](https://github.com/ComposableFi/centauri/tree/master/light-clients/ics10-grandpa-cw) (which is being used in production in Composable Finance's Centauri bridge). And there are others in development (e.g. for Near).

Reviewer 2: maybe we can add links to these projects? (Centauri Bridge/Near)
